# Input Output
# Input Output

Block Devices
> A device that stores data in a fixed size blocks, each uniquely addressed, and can be randomly accessed
> Minimal unit of allocation = block
> Usually Storage Devices
Character Devices
> Device that delivers or accepts a stream of characters
> Character == obsolte term
> More accurately Byte-oriented devices (character = small piece of memory)
> Keyboard, mouse,...does not have to be text-oriented
> Stream = what you get now is what you get (can't access for specific memory)
> To index, use a block device (since what's gone is gone)
Final Catgory : None of the above
--> very small
--> Example: clock (not indexable, but also not stream)
---> Rare, and require special case
Device Controllers
> The electronic component of an I/O unit, in contrast with the physical component.
We interface with device using controllers (from software pov)
 Device controllers have state element to them (like registers)
	 maybe even RAM

How do we communicate with device?
Depending on architecture,,,
1. Numbers that represent various device driver state (IO devices with separate addres space)
Copy from/to device controller from MAP
Numbers are IO ports
Contextualize addresses (IO port 2000, mem address 2000) --> special instructions to handle this (`in` `out` priv mode instructions) --> user space prgm must go through os
Port is a small integer sthat represents different services on the same machine

2. MMAP - ASsume that IO devices live within our address space
- Load or store of particular addresses
- Some of our v-space...backed by frame of ram....others for IO
- Instructions for device...simply use loads and stores (no need for separate priv mode instructions)
- We are wasting address space...(even if we have enough RAM)....we may run out of Vspace Aspace....especially for huge device

Page Table has some entries backed by devices. At MMU translated to address of state elements of device controllers.

In (1) OS is involved in every transfer. In (2) OS is involved in setting up.

---
Bus delivers interrupts + data\\\\

Interrupt -> Context switch -> lots of stores
	What if another interrupt occurs during the context switch?
		Maybe corrupt the state
Can't synchrnozies (softwarely)...since hardware interrupts cannot be stopped
We may need a physical device whose job it is to serialize and queue interrupts (Interrupt Controller)--> Buying us enough time for interrupt....We can be interrupted just after the context switch

Printer Example...
When printing
1. make copy of the document to OS (to prevent page faults)
2. How odes the system talk to this device? (ASSUME MMAP IO - NO PORTS)
	1. Polling
		1. while (BUSY) wait; <-- polling 
		2. Busy waiting waste resources
	2. Interrupt-Driven IO
		1. Instead of busy waiting....asking if the printer is busy
		2. have the printer tell us its ready!
	3. DMA
		1. The only interrupt we get is the last interrupt
		2. all intermediae ones are handled by the DMA controller
		3. offload work to DMA 'abstraction' buys us enough time to do enough work!

DMA comes with a cost
1. Physical Cost...
2. DISK Secotr minimal unit of allocation (512 Bytes)

---
