# Dual Mode 
If the operating system is simply a piece of software (built from the same instruction set as other user programs), how can we prevent a user program from skipping over the OS intermediary and accessing the hardware directly? In other words, how can we grand the OS authority to control the resources it has domain over?


## Multiple Instruction Sets
An instruction set is what defined the things that a processor can do. However, up until now, we have only been using a small subset of what the instruction set offers.

If we examine closely, the instruction set is partitioned into at least two partitions [^rings]:
1. First, there is the **User mode instructions**/**Protected mode instructions** which are the instructions that our user program runs. These are the instructions that are generated by a compiler when we write programs.
2. Next, there is the **Kernel mode instructions**/**Privileged mode instructions** which are instructions that only the operating system is allowed to run.


**Privileged mode instructions** are what grants the operating system its authority. These instructions often involve the direct manipulation of hardware and can only be called by the kernel[^kernel]. When an instruction in this mode is executed, the processor first distinguishes the 'current mode' to determine if it is allowed to run that instruction. Often times, the mode is tracked as a single bit flag inside the machine status register. Hence, if this flag indicates we are in kernel mode, we can run both Privileged and Protected mode instructions, whereas if it indicates we are in user mode, we can only run Protected mode instructions.

## Exceptions
But what if we attempt to execute a Privileged mode instructions while we are in user mode? The answer to that depends on what specific instruction was called and what architecture the CPU is. Historically (and least desirably), x86 has ignored these calls (which have caused problems when trying to virtualize x86). However, in many modern architectures (such as MIPS, and many x86-64 instructions), a call to an unauthorized instruction will raise an **exception** (e.g., Integer division by zero, Page fault). This exception invokes the operating system, which usually sends a signal to the process (which by default crashes the process).

## System calls flips the mode to Kernel mode
But if we need to be in the kernel mode to run Privileged mode instructions, how can we flip the mode from user to kernel? Since, the Privileged mode instructions exists to grant the operating system authority, we need to invoke operating system to flip between the modes. That means, as a user program, we need to make a system call to call the operating system. In fact, the `syscall` instruction in MIPS sets the mode to kernel mode just before the operating system code begins to execute. And once the operating system completes its execution, the return instruction sets flips the mode bit back to user mode.

This is another reason why the system calls and function calls are different. Whereas a function call simply needs to update the program counter, the system call also needs to indicate to the processor that the upcoming code belongs to the OS (which is allowed to run Privileged mode instructions).



